# Contexts Exports

This directory contains fit-for-purpose exports of JSON-LD contexts as well
as [SHACL](https://github.com/biopragmatics/bioregistry/issues/305)
formatted exports.

### Generated via Collections

Some are generated based on collections that contain a `context` key
corresponding to the filename `<context>.context.jsonld`. For example,
[`semweb.context.jsonld`](semweb.context.jsonld) groups several semantic web
resources like `dcterms`, `rdf`, and `owl`.

### Generated via code

The rest are generated by specific code written in
the `bioregistry.export.prefix_maps` module.

| File                                                                                                                    | Description                                                                                                                                         |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [`bioregistry.context.jsonld`](bioregistry.context.jsonld) and [`bioregistry.context.ttl`](bioregistry.context.ttl)     | Contains Bioregistry-normalized prefixes (lowercase, punctuation normalized) and the best URI prefixes for each based on the Bioregistry's ruleset. |
| [`obo.context.jsonld`](obo.context.jsonld) and [`obo.context.ttl`](obo.context.ttl)                                     | Contains prefixes and URI prefixes prioritized for the OBO Foundry and ontology contexts.                                                           |
| [`obo_synonyms.context.jsonld`](obo_synonyms.context.jsonld) and [`obo_synonyms.context.ttl`](obo_synonyms.context.ttl) | Contains prefixes, prefix's synonyms, and URI prefixes prioritized for the OBO Foundry and ontology contexts.                                       |

### Prescriptive Context Governance

- Each context must list its maintainers along with their current GitHub, email,
  and ORCID.
- Changes to contexts must always be made via pull requests.
- Changes must pass all CI tests to be considered for acceptance. These tests
  can be updated at the discretion of the Bioregistry Core Development Team.
- Changes can only be accepted and merged with the public consent of at least
  one of the maintainers on either the issue motivating the change or pull
  request substantiating it.
- A maintainer can not consent their own (suggested) changes, i.e., in this
  case, a second maintainer must also publicly agree.
- Maintainers for contexts do not necessarily need to be part of the
  Bioregistry's Review Team.
- If the maintainers publicly state disagreement on a change, then they are
  allowed two (2) weeks for deliberation. If a consensus can not be met, then
  the changes are dismissed.
- If a maintainer is pinged on the Bioregistry issue tracker regarding one of
  the contexts for which they are responsible, they have four (4) weeks to
  respond otherwise they will be removed as a maintainer.
- A technical solution based on CI/CD and GitHub's API will be used to randomly
  ping maintainers to check that they are still available on GitHub.
- Maintainers may unanimously nominate additional maintainers to be added at the
  discretion of the Bioregistry Review Team.
- If fewer there are fewer than two maintainers listed for any context, then the
  Bioregistry Review Team automatically gains the rights as a maintainer.
- If there are no maintainers for a given context, e.g., if all maintainers have
  been unavailable and have lost maintainer rights, then the Bioregistry Review
  Team may assign two maintainers at their discretion and then abdicate its
  responsibility as the maintainer of the context. It is advised not to
  re-assign previous maintainers who abdicated responsibility.
- Changes to the Prescriptive Context Governance must be solicited via the
  Bioregistry's public issue tracker and approved by the Bioregistry Review
  Team.
